.\" Copyright (C) 2018 Michael Herstine <sp1ff@pobox.com>
.\" You may distribute this file under the terms of the GNU Free
.\" Documentation License.
.TH scribbu-rename 1 2018-03-17 "scribbu 0.4" "scribbu Manual"
.SH NAME
scribbu rename \- Rename files according to the ID3 tag attributes
.SH SYNOPSIS
.BR scribbu " [(-c|--config) config-file] " rename " [-h] [--help] [--info]"
.RS 8
.br
[-n|--dry-run] [-v|--verbose] [(-o|--output) arg] [-r|--rename]
[(-t|--template) arg]
<file-or-directory> <file-or-directory>...

.SH DESCRIPTION

Rename one or more files, and/or the files in one or more directories,
according to their ID3 tags. By default, each file will be renamed to
.I <artist> - <title>.<extension>
where
.IR artist " & " title
are derived from the file's ID3 tags.

The caller can customize this, however, using the
.IR --template option ". "
This option accepts a string that mixes text with replacement
parameters (such as title, artist, album &c).

The replacement parameters begin with a % (escape % signs that do
.B not
start a replacement with a backslash). Each parameter has a
one-characer short form as well as a long-form name. For example,
artist can be represented as either 'A' or "artist". The short form
would be
.IR %A ", the long " %(artist) ". "

If the long form is used, the action of the replacement paramter may,
optionally, be modified by giving options after a colon. The options
take the form:
.IR opt0&opt1&opt2&... ", "
where
.I opt
.SB i
is of the form
.I name=value
or just
.IR name ". "
To continue the example, if we wanted the
artist to always be taken from the ID3v1 tag, and that field is
encoded as ISO-8859-1, we could say:
.sp
.if n \{\
.RS 4
.\}
.nf
%(artist:v1-only&v1-encoding=iso-8859-1)
.fi
.if n \{\
.RE
.\}
.sp

.SS Tag-based replacements

Replacement name: short form, long form

.RS 4
.IP "Album: L, album"
.IP "Artist: A, artist"
.IP "Content Type: G, {content-type,genre}"
.IP "Encoded by: e, encoded-by"
.IP "Title: T, title"
.IP "Year: Y, year"
.RE

Tag-based replacements take the following options:

.RS 4
.IP "source of the replacement text"
prefer-v2, prefer-v1, v2-only, v1-only
.IP "character encoding when the ID3v1 tag is used"
v1-encoding={auto, iso-8859-1,ascii,cp1252,utf-8,utf-16-be,utf-16,le,utf-32}
.IP "handling \"The ...\""
the(suffix), the=suffix,the=prefix
.IP "capitalizing words"
capitalization, capitalization={all-upper,all-lower}
.IP "handling whitespace"
compress, ws="TEXT"
.IP output character set
output=iso-8859-1,ascii,...
.RE

E.g.
.I %(artist:prefer-v2&v1-encoding=cp1252&the=suffix&compress)
applied to a file whose ID3v2 tag had an artist frame of "The Pogues"
would produce "Pogues, The".

In addition to the above, the year can be formatted as two digits or four
by giving "yy" or "yyyy" in the options for that replacement.

.SS Filename-based replacement parameters

Replacement name: short form, long form

.RS 4
.IP "basename: b, basename"
.IP "extension: E, extension (incl. dot)"
.RE

These take the same "The", capitalization & whitespace options as tag-based
replacements.

.SS Replacements based on the track data:

Replacement name: short form, long form

.RS 4
.IP "MD5 checksum: 5, md5"
.IP "size: S, size (bytes)"
.RE

Both replacements take the following options:

.RS 4
.IP "base: base={decimal,hex}"
.ip "case for hexadecimal digits: hex-case={U,L}"
.RE

.SH OPTIONS
.PP
\-h
.RS 4
Print a brief usage message on
.I stdout
& exit with status zero.
.RE
.PP
\-\-help
.RS 4
Display more detailed help; this man page by default, or the
.B scribbu-rename
node in the local Info system if the
.I --info
flag is also given.
.RE
.PP
\-\-info
.RS 4
Modify the
.I --help
flag by using the users's Infor viewer instead of man page viewer.
.RE
.PP
\-n|\-\-dry\-run
.RS 4
Dry-run; only print what
.I would
happen
.RE
.PP
\-o, \-\-output arg
.RS 4
If specified, copy the output files to this directory, rather than
renaming in-place.
.RE
.PP
\-r, \-\-rename
.RS 4
Remove the source file (ignored if
.I --dry-run is given)
.RE
.PP
\-t, \-\-template arg
.RS 4
Template by which to rename the files (defaults to
.IR "%A - %T.mp3" ).
.RE
.PP
\-v, \-\-verbose
.RS 4
Produce verbose output.
.RE
.PP
<argument...>
.RS 4
One or more files or directories to be examined; if a directory is
given, it will be searched recursively.

.SH AUTHOR

.B scribbu
is written & maintained by Michael Herstine <sp1ff@pobox.com>. It
is maintained at https://github.com/sp1ff/scribbu.

.SH "SEE ALSO"

.BR scribbu "(1), " scribbu-dump "(1), " scribbu-report "(1), " scribbu-split "(1)"
