.\" Copyright (C) 2018-2019 Michael Herstine <sp1ff@pobox.com>
.\" You may distribute this file under the terms of the GNU Free
.\" Documentation License.
.TH scribbu-dump 1 2019-01-06 "scribbu 0.5" "scribbu Manual"
.SH NAME
scribbu-dump \- dump ID3 tags from one or more files
.SH SYNOPSIS
.BR "scribbu dump " "[-h] [--help] [--info]"
.RS 8
.br
[-1|--id3v1-tags]
.br
[-D|--track-data]
.br
[-2|id3v2-tags]
.br
[(-i|--indent) arg]
.br
[-g|--no-expand-genre]
.br
[(-e|--expression) regex]
.br
[(-f|--format) format]
.br
[(-c|--v1-encoding) encoding]
.br
<files>

.SH DESCRIPTION

.B scribbu dump
will walk each file and/or directory specified, reading each file
found, looking for ID3 tags therein, and pretty-printing what it
finds to
.IR stdout ". "
The format is controlled by the
.I --format
flag, which may be either "standard" (the default) or "csv".

.SH OPTIONS
.PP
\-h
.RS 4
Print a brief usage message on
.I stdout
& exit with status zero.
.RE
.PP
\-\-help
.RS 4
Display more detailed help.
.RE
.PP
\-\-info
.RS 4
Display this sub-command's node in the user's Info viewer.
.RE
.PP
\-1, \-\-id3v1-tags
.RS4
Display ID3v1 tags only.
.RE
.PP
\-D, \-\-track\-data
.RS 4
Display track data only.
.RE
.PP
\-2, \-\-id3v2\-tags
splay ID3v2 tags only.
.RE
.PP
\-i, \-\-indent arg
.RS 4
Indent all output
.I arg
spaces.
.RE
.PP
\-g, \-\-no\-expand\-genre
.RS 4
Don't attempt to expand the genre when specified as a numeric constant.
.RE
.PP
\-e, \-\-expression regex
.RS 4
Define a regular expression for filtering the files to be pretty-printed. For
each file, its entire path will be
.B matched
against this regular expression before being pretty-printed (& non-matches
will be ignored).
.RE
.PP
\-f, \-\-format arg
.RS4
The desired output format; at present, only two values are supported for
this option:
.IP
"standard", which is the default, pretty-prints the selectd portions of
each file to
.I stdout
with one attribute (artist, title &c) per row.
.IP
"csv", which will print one line in CSV format per file.

The precise columns output will depend on the other options, but for
ID3v2 tags include:

version, revision, size, flags, unsynchronised, artist, title,
album, genre, encoded by, year, languages, play count, comments

for track data: size & MD5 checksum

for ID3v1 tags: v1.1, extended, artist, title, album, year, comment & genre.

.RE
.PP
\-c, \-\-v1\-encoding arg
.RS4
Specify an encoding for text in ID3v1 tags (CP1252 by default). Permissible
values are:

ASCII, ISO_8859_1, ISO_8859_2, ISO_8859_3, ISO_8859_4, ISO_8859_5, ISO_8859_7,
ISO_8859_9, ISO_8859_10, ISO_8859_13, ISO_8859_14, ISO_8859_15, ISO_8859_16,
KOI8_R, KOI8_U, KOI8_RU, CP1250, CP1251, CP1252, CP1253, CP1254, CP1257,
CP850, CP866, CP1131, MacRoman, MacCentralEurope, MacIceland, MacCroatian,
MacRomania, MacCyrillic, MacUkraine, MacGreek, MacTurkish, Macintosh,
ISO_8859_6, ISO_8859_8, CP1255, CP1256, CP862, MacHebrew, MacArabic,
EUC_JP, SHIFT_JIS, CP932, ISO_2022_JP, ISO_2022_JP_2, ISO_2022_JP_1,
ISO_2022_JP_MS, EUC_CN, HZ, GBK, CP936, GB18030, EUC_TW, BIG5, CP950,
BIG5_HKSCS, BIG5_HKSCS_2004, BIG5_HKSCS_2001, BIG5_HKSCS_1999, ISO_2022_CN,
ISO_2022_CN_EXT, EUC_KR, CP949, ISO_2022_KR, JOHAB, ARMSCII_8,
Georgian_Academy, Georgian_PS, KOI8_T, PT154, RK1048, TIS_620, CP874, MacThai,
MuleLao_1, CP1133, VISCII, TCVN, CP1258, HP_ROMAN8, NEXTSTEP,
UTF_8, UCS_2, UCS_2BE, UCS_2LE, UCS_4, UCS_4BE, UCS_4LE,
UTF_16, UTF_16BE, UTF_16LE, UTF_32, UTF_32BE, UTF_32LE,
UTF_7, C99, JAVA

.RE

.SH AUTHOR

.B scribbu
is written & maintained by Michael Herstine <sp1ff@pobox.com>. It
is maintained at https://github.com/sp1ff/scribbu.

.SH "SEE ALSO"

.BR scribbu "(1), " scribbu-rename "(1), " scribbu-report "(1), " scribbu-split "(1), " scribbu-popm "(1)"

