.\" Copyright (C) 2024 Michael Herstine <sp1ff@pobox.com>
.\" You may distribute this file under the terms of the GNU Free
.\" Documentation License.
.TH scribbu-xtag 1 2024-01-16 "scribbu 0.6.23" "scribbu Manual"
.SH NAME
scribbu-xtag \- Manage an ID3v2 tag cloud frame
.SH SYNOPSIS
.BR "scribbu xtag " "[-h] [--help] [--info]"
.RS 8
.br
[-u|--adjust-unsync]
[-b|--create-backups]
[-c|--create-v2] [-C|--always-create-v2]
[-f|--create-frame]
[-m|--merge]
[-n|--dry-run] [-g|--get]
[-o|--owner] owner
[-t|--tag] index
[-T|--xtags] tag-cloud
<file-or-directory> <file-or-directory>...

.SH DESCRIPTION

Manage tag cloud frames.
.br
.nf

scribbu xtag --owner=foo@bar.com --xtags="decade=90s&mood=uptempo" some.mp3

.fi
will set foo@bar.com's tag cloud frame (
.B XTAG
) to be "decade=90s" and "mood=uptemo"  in all tags in
.B some.mp3.
.nf

scribbu xtag --tag=0 --owner=foo@bar.com --merge --xtags='sub-genre=jazz' *.mp3

.fi
will
.B add
the tag "sub-genre=jazz" to foo@bar.com's tag cloud in the first ID3v2 tag only in all
.B .mp3
files in the current directory.
.nf

.SH OPTIONS

.PP
\-h
.RS 4
Print a brief usage message on
.I stdout
& exit with status zero.
.RE
.PP
\-\-help
.RS 4
Display more detailed help.
.RE
.PP
\-\-info
.RS 4
Display this sub-command's node in the user's Info viewer.
.RE
.PP
\-u,\-\-adjust-unsync
.RS 4
Update the unsynchronisation flag as needed on
write (default is to never use it).
.RE
.PP
\-b,\-\-create-backups
.RS 4
Create backup copies of all files before modifying them.
.RE
.PP
\-c,\-\-create\-v2
.RS 4
Create an ID3v2 tag with a XTAG frame for any file that has an ID3v1
tag but does not have an ID3v2 tag (fields from the ID3v1 tag will
be copied over).
.RE
.PP
\-C,\-\-always\-create\-v2
.RS 4
Always create an ID3v2 tag with the XTAG frame set appropriately for
any file that does not possess one.
.RE
.PP
\-f,\-\-create\-frame
.RS 4
Create a new XTAG frame if not present.
.RE
.PP
\-m,\-\-merge
.RS 4
Merge the given tags, don't overwrite
.RE
.PP
\-n,\-\-dry\-run
.RS 4
Don't do anything; just print what
.B would
be done.
.RE
.PP
\-g,\-\-get
.RS 4
Print the existing tag cloud, if any; don't set or update
.RE
.PP
\-o,\-\-owner OWNER
.RS 4
Operate only on XTAG frames with this owner, or specify
the owner in case an XTAG frame is being created.
.RE
.PP
\-t,\-\-tag INDEX
.RS 4
Zero-based index of the tag on which to operate; may
be given more than once to select multiple tags.
.RE
.PP
\-T,\-\-xtags TAG-CLOUD
.RS 4
Tags to be set or merged expressed in HTTP query parameter
style using URL-encoding, e.g. foo&bar=has%20%2c&splat=a,b,c
.RE
.RE

.SH AUTHOR

.B scribbu
is written & maintained by Michael Herstine <sp1ff@pobox.com>. It
is maintained at https://github.com/sp1ff/scribbu.

.SH "SEE ALSO"

.BR  scribbu "(1), " scribbu-dump "(1), " scribbu-genre "(1), " scribbu-popm "(1), " scribbu-rename "(1), " scribbu-report "(1), " scribbu-split "(1), " scribbu-m3u "(1), " scribbu-encodings "(1), " scribbu-text "(1)"
