.\" Copyright (C) 2019-2021 Michael Herstine <sp1ff@pobox.com>
.\" You may distribute this file under the terms of the GNU Free
.\" Documentation License.
.TH scribbu-popm 1 2021-05-02 "scribbu 0.6.18" "scribbu Manual"
.SH NAME
scribbu popm \- Manage the play count and/or popularimeter ID3v2 tags
.SH SYNOPSIS
.BR "scribbu  popm " "[-h] [--help] [--info]"
.RS 8
.br
[-n|--dry-run] [-u|--adjust-unsync] [-c|--count=] <play count>
[-a|--create] [-b|--create-backups] [-i|--increment=] <incement>
[-o|--owner=] <popularimeter owner> [-p|--playcount-only]
[-m|--popularimeter-only] [-r|--rating=] <rating>
[-t|--tag=] <tag index> <file-or-directory> <file-or-directory>...

.SH DESCRIPTION

Create or update the play count and/or popularimeter frames. With no
options, increment the count field in every play count and
popularimeter frame in all tags by one. With the
.I --create
flag,
.B create
the relevant frames in each tag. Popularimeter frames will not
be created in the absence of the
.I --owner
option. Play count & popularimeter frame creation can be inhibited via the
.IR --popularimeter-only and --playcount-only
flags, respectively.

The popularimeter rating can be set using the
.I --rating
option. Ratings can be specified explicitly as an integer between zero
and two-hundred fifty-five (inclusive), or as one-to-five stars. "Stars"
would most naturally be expressed as
.I *
(asterisks), but since that will often be inconvenient in the shell,
.I scribbu
will accept almost any character, repeated one to five times.
.I scribbu
maps stars to rating thusly:

.PP
no rating
.RS 4
0
.RE
.PP
one star
.RS 4
1-51 (26)
.RE
.PP
two stars
.RS 4
52-102 (77)
.RE
.PP
three stars
.RS 4
103->153 (128)
.RE
.PP
four stars
.RS 4
154->204 (179)
.RE
.PP
five stars
.RS 4
205->255 (230)
.RE

.SH OPTIONS

.PP
\-h
.RS 4
Print a brief usage message on
.I stdout
& exit with status zero.
.RE
.PP
\-\-help
.RS 4
Display more detailed help.
.RE
.PP
\-\-info
.RS 4
Display this sub-command's node in the user's Info viewer.
.RE
.PP
\-n|\-\-dry\-run
.RS 4
Dry-run; only print what
.I would
happen
.RE
.PP
\-a,\-\-create
.RS 4
Create playcount and/or popularimeter frames in any tags that are missing.
This can be modified by the
.IR --playcount-only and --popularimetr-only options,
respectively. Popularimeter frames will only be created if the
.IR --owner flag
is given, as well.
.RE
.PP
\-b,\-\-create-backups
.RS 4
By default, the new tagset will be written in-place (emplacing, if
feasible). This option will cause a backup file to be made first.
.RE
.PP
\-c,\-\-count=COUNT
.RS 4
Set the counter fields to COUNT
.RE
.PP
\-i,\-\-increment=INCR
.RS 4
Increment the count field by
.I INCR
, instead of one.
.RE
.PP
\-o,\-\-owner=OWNER
.RS 4
Specify the owner field for popularimeter frames. If incrementing or
setting count fields, only popularimeter frames with an owner of
.I OWNER
will be updated. When creating popularimeter frames, the owner field
will be set to
.BR OWNER .
.RE
.PP
\-p,\-\-playcount-only
.RS 4
If present, this switch will limit operations to play count frames.
.RE
.PP
\-m,\-\-popularimeter-only
.RS 4
If present, this switch will limit operations to popularimeter frames.
.RE
.PP
\-r,\-\-rating=RATING
.RS 4
Specify the rating for use in popularimeter tags. RATING may be given
either as an integer between 0 & 255 (inclusive), or as one to
five "stars", given as [a-zA-Z@#%*+]{1,5} (e.g. three stars could be
expressed as "xxx", or "###").
.RE
.PP
\-t,\-\-tag=INDEX
.RS 4
Specify a zero-based index describing which tag to alter, in the
case of multiple ID3v2 tags in a given file. This option may be
given more than once to select multiple tags. If not given, all
tags present will be modified.
.RE
.PP
\-u,\-\-adjust-unsync
.RS 4
Adjust each tag's use of the unsynchronisation scheme on write (by
default, it's never used)
.RE
.PP
<argument...>
.RS 4
One or more files or directories to be examined; if a directory is
given, it will be searched recursively for files containing ID3v2
tags.

.SH AUTHOR

.B scribbu
is written & maintained by Michael Herstine <sp1ff@pobox.com>. It
is maintained at https://github.com/sp1ff/scribbu.

.SH "SEE ALSO"

.BR  scribbu "(1), " scribbu-dump "(1), " scribbu-genre "(1), " scribbu-rename "(1), " scribbu-report "(1), " scribbu-split "(1), " scribbu-text "(1), " scribbu-m3u "(1), " scribbu-encodings "(1)"
