.\" Copyright (C) 2021 Michael Herstine <sp1ff@pobox.com>
.\" You may distribute this file under the terms of the GNU Free
.\" Documentation License.
.TH scribbu-m3u 1 2021-05-02 "scribbu 0.6.18" "scribbu Manual"
.SH NAME
scribbu m3u \- M3U playlists from one or more files
.SH SYNOPSIS
.BR "scribbu m3u " "[-h] [--help] [--info]"
.RS 8
.BR
[-s |--source-encoding=]SRC
.BR
[-o |--output=]OUT
.BR
[-a|--append]
.BR
[-8|--use-utf-8]
.BR
[-v|--verbose]
.BR
<file-or-directory> <file-or-directory>...

.SH DESCRIPTION

Print extended M3U entries for one or more files. By default, print
EXTM3U entries to stdout for all the files named on the command
line. If an argument is a directory, operate recursively on all files
therein (the order of traversal is unspecified).

Each extended M3U entry takes the form:
.BR
.NF

    # EXINF:<duration-in-seconds>,<display title>
    <path-to-file>

.FI
The display title will be "Artist - Title" if those two items can be
derived from ID3 tags; otherwise the file basename will be used. The
text forming the artist & title tags will be assumed to be in the
system locale's encoding. To override this, specify the
.I -s
flag (for source encoding).

The entry's path will be relative or absolute, according to the
argument (i.e. specifying an absolute path to a file or directory will
produce absolute paths, a relative path to a file or directory
relative paths in the output).

When writing entries to
.I stdout
all text will be written in the system locale's text encoding.

If the
.I -o
option is given, the output will be written to the file named as the
option's value. By convention, files ending in .m3u8 are UTF-8 encoded
and files ending in .m3u are written in an unspecified encoding. Given
that M3U is a de facto standard, scribbu does not enforce this (or any
other naming convention).

In this case, a new file will be created with the #EXTM3U header line,
unless the
.I -a
(append) flag is given, in which case the output will be appended to
the (presumably existing) file.

By default, output will be in the system locale's text encoding. To
force UTF-8 output, specify the
.I -8
option.

So, for instance, if your system locale's encoding is ISO-8859-1, and
your tags are written in, say, Windows Code Page 1251, but you would
like an M3U playlist in UTF-8 format, say:

.NF

  scribbu m3u -s CP1251 -o test.m3u8 -8 some-directory/

.FI

.SH OPTIONS

.PP
\-h
.RS 4
Print a brief usage message on
.I stdout
& exit with status zero.
.RE
.PP
\-\-help
.RS 4
Display more detailed help (and exit with status zero).
.RE
.PP
\-\-info
.RS 4
Display this sub-command's node in the user's Info viewer.
.RE
.PP
\-\-verbose
.RS 4
Produce more verbose output; this really only makes sense when
printing entries to file (otherwise the informational messages will be
intermingled with the entries printed to
.I stdout
).
.RE
.PP
\-s,\-\-source-encoding
.RS 4
Specify the text encoding in which the textual tags author & title are
written in the files to be processed; e.g. "ASCII" or "UTF-8". Say `
.I scribbu encodings
\' for a list of names for all supported encodings.
.RE
.PP
\-o,\-\-output
.RS 4
This option indicates that the EXTM3U entries shall be written to the
given file rather than
.I stdout.
.RE
.PP
\-a,\-\-append
.RS 4
When writing to file, this option indicates that the named file should
be appended to rather than overwritten.
.RE
.PP
\-8,\-\-use-utf-8
.RS 4
When writing to file, this option indicates that the output shall be
encoded as UTF-8 (rather than the system locale's text encoding, which
is the default behavior).
.RE

.SH AUTHOR

.B scribbu
is written & maintained by Michael Herstine <sp1ff@pobox.com>. It
is maintained at https://github.com/sp1ff/scribbu.

.SH "SEE ALSO"

.BR  scribbu "(1), " scribbu-dump "(1), " scribbu-genre "(1), " scribbu-popm "(1), " scribbu-rename "(1), " scribbu-report "(1), " scribbu-split "(1), " scribbu-text "(1), " scribbu-encodings "(1)"
