.\" Copyright (C) 2018-2020 Michael Herstine <sp1ff@pobox.com>
.\" You may distribute this file under the terms of the GNU Free
.\" Documentation License.
.TH scribbu 1 2020-05-25 "scribbu 0.6.1" "scribbu Manual"
.SH NAME
scribbu \- The extensible tool for tagging your music collection
.SH SYNOPSIS
.HP
.B scribbu
[-h|--help] [-v|--version] [--info]
.RS 8
.br
([(-e|--expression) expr] |
.br
[(-f|--file) file] |
.br
[<sub-command> <args>])
.RE

.SH DESCRIPTION
.BR scribbu
is a C++ library & associated command-line tool for working with
ID3-tagged files (presumably music). In addition to assorted
sub-commands, the scribbu command embeds
.B Guile,
allowing it to be scripted using
.B Scheme
.

.B scribbu
can be invoked in a few ways:

.IP "  1."
with a Scheme expression
.RI ( -e ", " --expression )
or Scheme file
.RI ( -f ", " --file "). "
In this case,
.B scribbu
will evaluate the given program & exit.

.IP "  2."
with no arguments at all. In this case,
.B scribbu
will drop into a Scheme shell in which the user can evaluate arbitrary
Scheme expressions.

.IP "  3."
with a sub-command & relevant options & arguments.
.B scribbu
implements the following sub-commands:
.IP
.BR scribbu-dump (1)
.RS 8
.B scribbu dump
will write the contents of any & all ID3 tags found in one or more
files to
.IR stdout .
.RE
.IP
.BR scribbu-rename (1)
.RS 8
.B scribbu rename
will rename one or more files based on the contents of their ID3 tags; e.g.
.B scribbu rename -t "%A-%T.mp3" *.mp3
will rename all the files matching
.IR *.mp3 " to " <artist>-<title>.mp3
where "artist" and "title" are derived from their ID3 tags (if any).
.RE
.IP
.BR scribbu-report (1)
.RS 8
.B scribbu report
will generate a report listing ID3 attributes on one or more files on
.I stdout.
Only
.SM CSV
format is supported currently.
.RE
.IP
.BR scribbu-split (1)
.RS 8
.B scribbu split
will split one file into many; with each new file corresponding to some
component of the input file: ID3v1 tag, data, and/or ID3v2 tag(s).
.RE
.IP
.BR scribbu-popm (1)
.RS 8
.B scribbu popm
will create or update playcount & popularimeter frames in some or all
ID3v2 tags.
.RE
.IP
.BR scribbu-text (1)
.RS 8
.B scribbu text
manages ID3v2 text frames.
.RE
.P
Any sub-command can be invoked with
.IR --help " or " -h
for more information (or see the man pages referenced above).

.SS Getting Help

man pages are available for the
.B scribbu
command itself (i.e. this page), as well as all sub-commands. Their
pages can be viewed by typing
.IR "man scribbu-SUBCOMMAND" " where " SUB-COMMAND
is the name of the sub-command for which help is sought.

For
.B scribbu
and each sub-command, passing the
.I -h
option will produce a brief, unformatted usage message on
.IR stdout ". " --help
will produce the corresponding man page, unless modified with the
.I --info
flag, in which case the corresponding node will be displayed in
the users's Info viewer (i.e. the same behavior as
.RB "git " (git "(1)). "

The primary documentation, however, is the
.BR scribbu " Texinfo manual, "
which should be available via:
.IR "info scribbu" ". "

.SS Scripting scribbu with Scheme

While
.B scribbu
provides a few sub-commands for carrying out various
tasks the author has found useful, this approach is limited in the
scope of operations it can realistically support. Much more flexible
would be to provide a Turing-complete programming language that
provides built-in operations implemented in terms of the
.B scribbu
library, which is exactly what Guile provides.

.B scribbu
embeds a Scheme interpreter, which users can invoke with
the
.IR -e " or " -f
flags, passing a Scheme expression or a Scheme file,
respectively. Simply typing
.B scribbu
will drop the user into an interactive Scheme shell.

See the
.BR scribbu " Texinfo manual, "
which should be available via:
.IR "info scribbu" ", "
for complete documentation of the methods & types
.B scribbu
exports to Scheme.

.SH OPTIONS
.PP
\-v, \-\-version
.RS 4
Print
.B scribbu
version on
.I stdout
& exit with status zero.
.RE
.PP
\-h
.RS 4
Print a brief usage message on
.I stdout
& exit with status zero.
.RE
.PP
\-\-help
.RS 4
Display more detailed help; this man page by default, or the
.B scribbu
node in the local Info system if the
.I --info
flag is also given.
.RE
.PP
\-\-info
.RS 4
Modify the
.I --help
flag by using the users's Infor viewer in stead of man page viewer.
.RE

.SH AUTHOR

.B scribbu
is written & maintained by Michael Herstine <sp1ff@pobox.com>. It
is maintained at https://github.com/sp1ff/scribbu.

.SH "SEE ALSO"

.BR  scribbu-dump "(1), " scribbu-popm "(1), " scribbu-rename "(1), " scribbu-report "(1), " scribbu-split "(1), " scribbu-text "(1)"
