.\" Copyright (C) 2020 Michael Herstine <sp1ff@pobox.com>
.\" You may distribute this file under the terms of the GNU Free
.\" Documentation License.
.TH scribbu-genre 1 2020-05-25 "scribbu 0.6.1" "scribbu Manual"
.SH NAME
scribbu genre \- Set the genre for one or more files
.SH SYNOPSIS
.BR "scribbu genre " "[-h] [--help] [--info]"
.RS 8
.br
[-n|--dry-run] [-v|--verbose] [-u|--adjust-unsync]
.br
[-c|--create-v2] [-a|--always-create-v2]
.br
[-C|--create-v1] [-A|--always-create-v1]
.br
[-1|--v1-only] [-2|--v2-only]
.br
[-b|--create-backups]
.br
[-t |--tag=]INDEX
.br
[-w |--winamp=]WINAMP-NUMERIC-GENRE
.br
[-g |--genre=]WINAMP-TEXTUAL-GENRE
.br
[-G |--Genre=]GENRE
.br
[-v |--v1=]NUMERICAL-GENRE
.br
[-W|--list-winamp-genres]
.br
[-P|--no-pager]
.br
<file-or-directory> <file-or-directory>...

.SH DESCRIPTION

Set the genre for one or more files. By default, set the genre for all
tags in all files named on the command line. If an argument is a file,
operate on the tages in that file. If the argument is a directory,
operate recursively on all files containing ID3 tags therein.

The genre can be specified in a few ways:
.br
.nf

    scribbu genre -w N

.fi
will interpret
.B N
as one of the genres defined by Winamp, specified as an integer
between 0 & 191 (inclusive). The list is found below, but you can
always run
.I scribbu genre -W
to print it.
.br
.nf

    scribbu genre -g GENRE

.fi
will attempt to map to map the string
.B GENRE
to one of the Winamp genres using Damerau-Levenshtein distance,
but disregarding case.  For instance
.I scribbu genre -g rok
will be interpreted as Winamp genre 17: "Rock".
.br
.nf

    scribbu genre -G GENRE

.fi
will accept
.B GENRE
uncritically as the TCON (Content Type) to be used for ID3v2 tags. ID3v1
tags, if present, will have their genre field mapped to one of the Winamp values
again by case-insensitive Damerau-Levenshtein distance (or just set to 255 if
that fails). To explicitly set the ID3v1 version when specifying genre in this
way, add the
.I --v1
flag (e.g.
.I scribbu genre -G foo --v1 17
.

The operation can also be scoped by tag; cf. options
.IR --v1-only ", " --v2-only " & " --tag-index ", below."
This brings up the question of what to do if there is no ID3v1 and/or
no ID3v2 tag. By default, in the absence of a tag, nothing will be
done (so if invoked, for instance, on a file with neither an ID3v1 nor
an ID3v2 tag, this sub-command would do nothing). This behavior can be
customized by the following flags:

.PP
\-c, \-\-create\-v2
.RS 4
create an ID3v2.3 tag & add a TCON frame to it for any file that has an ID3v1 tag, but no ID3v2 tag
.RE

.PP
\-C,\-\-create\-v1
.RS 4
create an ID3v1 tag and set its genre field appropriately for any file that has an ID3v2 tag, but
no ID3v1 tag
.RE

.PP
\-a,\-\-always\-create-v2
.RS 4
create an ID3v2.3 tag & add a TCON frame to it for any file that does
not have an ID3v2.3 tag, regardless of the presence or absence of an
ID3v1 tag; use this with caution when operating on directories, or you
may find assorted non-musical files have had an ID3v2 tag prepended to
them
.RE

.PP
\-A,\-\-always\-create\-v1
.RS 4
create an ID3v1 tag & set its genre field appropriately for any file
that does not have an ID3v1 tag, regardless of the presence or absence
of an ID3v2 tag; use this with caution when operating on directories,
or you may find assorted, non-musical files have had ID3v1 tags
appended to them
.RE

Finally, serialization of new or updated tags can be modified with the following
options:

.PP
\-n,\-\-dry\-run
.RS 4
don't actually modify any files; just print what
.I would
be done on stdout
.RE

.PP
\-u,\-\-adjust\-unsync
.RS 4
update the unsynchronisatoin flag as needed on write (the default is
to just never use it)
.RE

.PP
\-b,\-\-create\-backups
.RS 4
create a backup copy of each file before writing new or updated tags
(this is good for experimenting or gaining confidence with the tool)
.RE

.SH OPTIONS

.PP
\-h
.RS 4
Print a brief usage message on
.I stdout
& exit with status zero.
.RE
.PP
\-\-help
.RS 4
Display more detailed help.
.RE
.PP
\-\-info
.RS 4
Display this sub-command's node in the user's Info viewer.
.RE
.PP
\-n|\-\-dry\-run
.RS 4
Dry-run; only print what
.I would
happen
.RE
.PP
\-u,\-\-adjust-unsync
.RS 4
Adjust each tag's use of the unsynchronisation scheme on write (by
default, it's never used)
.RE
.PP
\-a,\-\-always\-create\-v2
.RS 4
Always create an ID3v2 tag with a TCON frame for any file that does
not possess one.
.RE
.PP
\-A,\-\-always\-create\-v1
.RS 4
Always create an ID3v1 tag with the genre field set appropriately for
any file that does not possess one.
.RE
.PP
\-b,\-\-create-backups
.RS 4
By default, the new tagset will be written in-place (emplacing, if
feasible). This option will cause a backup file to be made before
changing the original.
.RE
.PP
\-c,\-\-create\-v2
.RS 4
Create an ID3v2 tag with a TCON frame for any file that has an ID3v1
tag but does not have an ID3v2 tag (fields from the ID3v1 tag will
be copied over).
.RE
.PP
\-C,\-\-create\-v1
.RS 4
Create an ID3v1 tag with the genre field set appropriately for any
file that has an ID3v2 tag, but no ID3v1 tag.
.RE
.PP
\-g,\-\-genre
.RS 4
The textual name of one of the 192 Winamp-defined genres ("Rock",
e.g.) Since typos are to be expected, the input will be matched
to the official list by minimal Damerau-Levenshtein distance.
The genre field for ID3v1 tags will be the corresponding numeric
value. See also
.I --list-winamp-genres
, below.
.RE
.PP
\-G,\-\-Genre
.RS 4
The text to be used for ID3v2 TCON frames, taken verbatim (i.e. no
matching to the Winamp-defined list will be done). The value for
the genre field in ID3v1 tags
.B will
however be determined by the closest match to the Winamp-defined
list. See also
.I --v1
below for how to turn off that behavior.
.RE
.PP
\-W,\-\-list\-winamp\-genres
.RS 4
Since no-one's got all 192 Winamp-defined genres committed to memory,
this is a convenience option; if given the Winamp genre list will
be printed, piped through your pager if
.I scribbu
can determine that (the environment variables
.IR SCRIBBU_PAGER " & " PAGER
are checked first, then any program named
.I less
on the
.I PATH
will be accepted). See also
.I \-\-no\-pager below.
.RE
.PP
\-P,\-\-no\-pager
.RS 4
Do not use any pager when printing the Winamp genre list; just
print to
.I stdout.
.PP
\-t,\-\-tag=INDEX
.RS 4
Specify a zero-based index describing which tag to alter, in the
case of multiple ID3v2 tags in a given file. This option may be
given more than once to select multiple tags. If not given, all
tags present will be modified.
.RE
.PP
\-v,\-\-v1
.RS 4
Numeric genre to use for ID3v1 tags when
.I -G
is given.
.RE
.PP
\-1,\-\-v1\-only
.RS 4
Only update ID3v1 tags; ignore any ID3v2 tags found.
.RE
.PP
\-2,\-\-v2\-only
.RS 4
Only update ID3v2 tags; ignore any ID3v1 tags found.
.RE
.PP
\-w,\-\-winamp
.RS 4
Specify the genre numerically in terms of the 192 Winamp-defined
genres.
.RE
.PP
<argument...>
.RS 4
One or more files or directories to be examined; if a directory is
given, it will be searched recursively for files containing ID3v2
tags.

.SH AUTHOR

.B scribbu
is written & maintained by Michael Herstine <sp1ff@pobox.com>. It
is maintained at https://github.com/sp1ff/scribbu.

.SH "SEE ALSO"

.BR  scribbu "(1), " scribbu-dump "(1), " scribbu-rename "(1), " scribbu-report "(1), " scribbu-split "(1), " scribbu-text "(1)"
