.\" Copyright (C) 2019-2022 Michael Herstine <sp1ff@pobox.com>
.\" You may distribute this file under the terms of the GNU Free
.\" Documentation License.
.TH scribbu-text 1 2022-12-31 "scribbu 0.6.23" "scribbu Manual"
.SH NAME
scribbu-text \- Manage ID3v2 text frames
.SH SYNOPSIS
.BR "scribbu text " "[-h] [--help] [--info]"
.RS 8
.br
[-u|--adjust-unsync] [-a|--album=] <album> [-A|--artist=] <artist>
[-c|--create-v2] [-C|--always-create-v2]
[-b|--create-backups] [-d|--delete=] <frames> [-E|--encoding] encoding
[-e|--encoded-by] encoder [-g|--genre] genre [-t|--tag] index
[-T|--title] title [-t|--track] track [-y|--year] year
<file-or-directory> <file-or-directory>...

.SH DESCRIPTION

Create, update or delete assorted text frames.
.br
.nf

scribbu text --artist="Pogues, The" --title="Lorca's Novena" some.mp3

.fi
will set the artist & title frames (
.BR TPE1 " and " TIT2 ", resp.)"
in all tags in
.B some.mp3.
.nf

scribbu text --tag=0 --artist='Pogues, The' *.mp3

.fi
will set the artist frame in the first ID3v2 tag only in all
.B .mp3
files in the current directory.
.nf

scribbu text --delete=TENC foo/

.fi
will delete the encoded-by frame in all ID3v2-tagged files in
.B foo/
and its sub-directories.

.SH OPTIONS

.PP
\-h
.RS 4
Print a brief usage message on
.I stdout
& exit with status zero.
.RE
.PP
\-\-help
.RS 4
Display more detailed help.
.RE
.PP
\-\-info
.RS 4
Display this sub-command's node in the user's Info viewer.
.RE
.PP
\-A,\-\-always\-create\-v1
.RS 4
Always create an ID3v1 tag with the genre field set appropriately for
any file that does not possess one.
.RE
.PP
\-c,\-\-create\-v2
.RS 4
Create an ID3v2 tag with a TCON frame for any file that has an ID3v1
tag but does not have an ID3v2 tag (fields from the ID3v1 tag will
be copied over).
.RE
.PP
\-a,\-\-album=ALBUM Set the TALB, or Album/Movie/Show Title frame
.RE
.PP
\-A,\-\-artist=ARTIST Set the TPE1, or Lead artist(s)/Lead
performer(s)/Soloist(s)/Performing group frame
.RE
.PP
\-e,\-\-encoded-by=ENCODED_BY Set the TENC, or Encoded By frame
.RE
.PP
\-g,\-\-genre=GENRE Set the TCON, or Content time frame
.RE
.PP
\-T,\-\-title=TITLE Set the TIT2, or Title/Songname/Content description frame
.RE
.PP
\-k,\-\-track=TRACK Set the TRCK, or Track number/Position in set frame
.RE
.PP
\-y,\--year=YEAR Set the TYER, or Year frame
.RE
.PP
\-d,\-\-delete=FRAME Specify a frame to remove, if present; this
option may be given more than once to delete multiple frames. Frames
may be named by either their option name (e.g. `artist') or by their
ID3v2.3 frame ID (e.g. TPE1).
.RE
.PP
\-E,\-\-encoding=ENCODING Specify the character encoding used in the
input strings using the iconv name (`ISO-8859-1', e.g.) If not given,
the system locale will be assumed.
.RE
.PP
\-t,\-\-tag=INDEX Zero-based index of the tag on which to operate; may
be given more than once to select multiple tags
.RE
.PP
\-b,\-\-create-backups Create backup copies of all files before
modifying them.
.RE
.PP
\-u,\-\-adjust-unsync Update the unsynchronisation flag as needed on
write (default is to never use it).
.RE

.SH AUTHOR

.B scribbu
is written & maintained by Michael Herstine <sp1ff@pobox.com>. It
is maintained at https://github.com/sp1ff/scribbu.

.SH "SEE ALSO"

.BR  scribbu "(1), " scribbu-dump "(1), " scribbu-genre "(1), " scribbu-popm "(1), " scribbu-rename "(1), " scribbu-report "(1), " scribbu-split "(1), " scribbu-m3u "(1), " scribbu-encodings "(1)"
