.\" Copyright (C) 2018-2020 Michael Herstine <sp1ff@pobox.com>
.\" You may distribute this file under the terms of the GNU Free
.\" Documentation License.
.TH scribbu 1 2020-05-25 "scribbu 0.6.1" "scribbu Manual"
.SH NAME
scribbu-report \- generate a report on one or more files' ID3 tags
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B "scribbu report " "[-h] [--help] [--info]"
.RS 8
[(-c|--num-comments) arg] [(-o|--output) output] [(-1|--v1-encoding) arg]
[-t|--tsv-format [-a|--ascii-delimited]] <file-or-directory> <file-or-directory...>
.RE

.SH DESCRIPTION

Generate a report on one or more files containing ID3 tags. The
assumed workflow is to have
.B scribbu
do the work of extracting ID3 data from the input files, and to use
some other tool better suited to querying & reporting.  Consequently,
filtering mechanisms are minimal, and the output formats (CSV or TDF) are
chosen to facilitate transformation to other formats as well as import
by other tools.

.SH OPTIONS
.PP
\-h
.RS 4
Print a brief usage message on
.I stdout
& exit with status zero.
.RE
.PP
\-\-help
.RS 4
Display more detailed help.
.RE
.PP
\-\-info
Display this sub-command's node in the user's Info viewer.
.RE
.PP
\-c, \-\-num\-comments arg
.RS 4
Number of comment tags to be printed (their # will always be
reported). Defaults to six.
.RE
.PP
\-o, \-\-output arg
.RS 4
@file{.csv} file to which the results will be written
.RE
.PP
\-1, \-\-v1\-encoding arg
.RS 4
Encoding to be used for text in ID3v1 tags (defaults to (CP1252).
.RE
.PP
\-t, \-\-tsv\-format
.RS 4
Select tab-delimited format instead of comma-separated values (the default)
.RE
.PP
\-a, \-\-ascii\-delimited
.RS 4
If using tab-delimited format, output ASCII-delimited text by using 0x1f
(ASCII unit separator) to delimit fields rather than TABs.
.RE

.SH AUTHOR

.B scribbu
is written & maintained by Michael Herstine <sp1ff@pobox.com>. It
is maintained at https://github.com/sp1ff/scribbu.

.SH "SEE ALSO"

.BR  scribbu "(1), " scribbu-dump "(1), " scribbu-popm "(1), " scribbu-rename "(1), " scribbu-split "(1), " scribbu-text "(1)"
